use-case: deeply replace packages (#12)
nixpkgs-architecture/packages-modules: use-cases/deep-replace.md

# Deeply Replacing Packages in Nixpkgs

## General Information

Replace all "instances" of a package across a dependency graph.
This may be replacing all usage in a package set, collection of package sets,
a collection of ad-hoc recipes, or a collection of flakes.

A possible motivation for _deep replacement_ may be to ensure that a security
fix provided by a new release of a piece of software is used "everywhere" in
the dependency graph.

## Concrete Examples

While the precise organization of packages will effect the complexity and
effort required to perform _deep replacement_, in general we say that this
is accomplished using helper functions such as `extend`, `overrideScope'`, and
`appendOverlays`, as well as the configuration field `overlays`.

### Simple Overlay

```nix
pkgs.extend ( final: prev: { foo = final.callPackage ./my-pkgs/foo {}; } )
```

<a name="Nested-Ex"></a>
### Nested Overlays

> Nested overlays and "chained" vs. "composed" overlays, as well as when `prev`
> and `final` should be used is a common source of confusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nested overlays, "chained" vs. "composed" overlays, as and when to use `prev`
and `final` are common sources of confusion.
```

`appendOverlays`, as well as the configuration field `overlays`.

### Simple Overlay
```nix
pkgs.extend ( final: prev: { foo = final.callPackage ./my-pkgs/foo {}; } )
```

### Nested Overlay

```nix
pkgs.extend ( final: prev: {
  nodejs       = prev.nodejs-14_x;
  nodePackages = prev.nodePackages.extend ( nfinal: nprev: {
    bar = nfinal.callPackage ./my-pkgs/bar {};
  } );
} )
```

## Current Problems

With this approach we have three main sources of complexity, none of which
truly prevent a user from accomplishing their goal; but we might suffice to
say that it may be worthwhile to provide a more straightforward mechanism
for handling this use case.

1. [github:NixOS/nixpkgs://lib/customisation.nix](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/lib/customisation.nix)
routines aren't intuitively understood by many users.
  - `self`/`super` and `final`/`prev` are difficult for new users to understand.
  - Easy to accidentally trigger infinite recursion.
  - Some packages are not _truly_ overridable, which advanced users will only
    discover after a lengthy debugging session.

2. Nested scopes are difficult to locate, and the relationship between

>    parent scopes and child scopes is not opaque to users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   parent scopes and child scopes is opaque to users.
```

## General Information

Replace all "instances" of a package across a dependency graph.
This may be replacing all usage in a package set, collection of package sets,
a collection of ad-hoc recipes, or a collection of flakes.

A possible motivation for _deep replacement_ may be to ensure that a security
fix provided by a new release of a piece of software is used "everywhere" in
the dependency graph.

## Concrete Examples

While the precise organization of packages will effect the complexity and
effort required to perform _deep replacement_, in general we say that this
is accomplished using helper functions such as `extend`, `overrideScope'`, and
`appendOverlays`, as well as the configuration field `overlays`.

### Simple Overlay

```nix
pkgs.extend ( final: prev: { foo = final.callPackage ./my-pkgs/foo {}; } )
```

<a name="Nested-Ex"></a>
### Nested Overlays

This fails to use Node.js v14 in `nodePackages`, which is unexpected to
most users.
```nix
# XXX: Incorrect usage
pkgs.extend ( final: prev: {
  nodejs       = prev.nodejs-14_x;
  nodePackages = prev.nodePackages.extend ( nfinal: nprev: {
    bar = nfinal.callPackage ./my-pkgs/bar {};

>   } );

Reviewer 3: Great example!

Reviewer 3: Wait a second, why does this not work? `prev.nodejs` isn't referenced anywhere in this overlay, so the old value shouldn't be used anywhere either, right?

Reviewer 4: I think it's because `prev.nodePackages.extend` is used instead of `final.nodePackages.extend`

Reviewer 3: I just wanted to try this out, but turns out `nodePackages.callPackage` doesn't exist, so this code doesn't work:
```
error: attribute 'callPackage' missing

       at /home/tweagysil/src/nixpkgs/ext.nix:6:15:

            5|       nodePackages = prev.nodePackages.extend ( nfinal: nprev: {
            6|         bar = nfinal.callPackage ./my-pkgs/bar {};
             |               ^
            7|       } );
```

@aakropotkin Can you give an example that can be reproduced?

Author: yes absolutely

Reviewer 4: Still, I think the mistake here is using:
```
nodePackages = prev.nodePackages.extend
```
instead of
```
nodePackages = curr.nodePackages.extend
```

If that is correct, then the example doesn't demonstrate a problem with deeply replacing packages, but a bad UX of the override concept, that allows the user to confuse `prev` and `curr`.

} )
```

To accomplish use Node.js v14 here the user would need two overlays.
```nix
let
  pkgsN14 = pkgs.extend ( final: prev: { nodejs = prev.nodejs-14_x; } );
in pkgsN14.extend ( final: prev: {
  nodePackages = prev.nodePackages.extend ( nfinal: nprev: {
    bar = nfinal.callPackage ./my-pkgs/bar {};
  } );
} )
```

## Current Problems

With this approach we have three main sources of complexity, none of which

> truly prevent a user from accomplishing their goal; but we might suffice to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
truly prevent a user from accomplishing their goal, but we might suffice to
```
